# Pico MIDI Mirror

This is a replacement for an earlier web-based project called [MIDI
RTL](https://github.com/duhrer/midi-rtl). In that version, MIDI messages with note information were "flipped" around middle C (note 60).

I made the original project largely as a prank to play on people who can sight
read or who know piano tunes by heart, as the spacing of the naturals and
flat/sharps no longer lines up with the black and white keys.

The new version flips around note 68 (G Sharp/A flat), so that the white keys
remain natural and the black keys remain sharps/flats.  If you think of E as C
and reverse the position of your fingers, you can play mirrored tunes.

This project was cloned from [my template
repository](https://github.com/duhrer/pico-midi-transformer), see that project
for more information.

### Hardware Prerequisites

First, you'll need compatible hardware, which means a Pico or compatible unit
with two USB ports. The [Adafruit Feather RP2040 with USB Type A
Host](https://www.adafruit.com/product/5723) is a good example of a unit that
has the second USB port built-in. You can also bring your own Pico (or
Pico-compatible) and wire it up as described in the documentation for the [OGX
Mini project](https://github.com/wiredopposite/OGX-Mini).

### Software Prerequisites

Once you have something to run the code on, you'll need to set up a build
environment. In the past, I have used:

1. The [Getting Started with Pico Guide](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.org/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf)
2. The [Pico VS Code extension](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-vscode)

Both of those are probably the easiest starting points, and if you hit upon
questions, there are lots of people working with them, so hopefully you can find
the guidance you need.

Personally, I use [distrobox](https://distrobox.it/) and [the docker container
created by `lukstep`](https://github.com/lukstep/raspberry-pi-pico-docker-sdk),
which I set up using commands like:

```
distrobox-create --image lukstep/raspberry-pi-pico-sdk -n pico-sdk
distrobox enter pico-sdk
```

### Checking out the Code

This project uses [git
submodules](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules) for the
libraries it relies on. This means that if you
[clone](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-clone) this repository, you won't have all
the code you need to successfully build binaries.

Although there are multiple ways to manage submodules, the simplest way to get
everything you need is to use a command like:

```
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/duhrer/pico-midi-transformer.git
```

### Building

Once you have a working build environment, you should be able to build the code
in this project using commands like:

```
mkdir -p build
cd build
cmake ..
make -j8
```

You should end up with binaries in various formats.

### Installing

The simplest way to install a binary is to boot the microcontroller into
`bootsel` mode. Hold down the `bootsel` button and plug your microcontroller
into USB. A USB drive will appear, and you can copy one the
`pico-midi-transformer.uf2` file generated by the build process onto your unit.
It will process and install the binary if it can. If it doesn't do anything,
make sure you're building for the right processor family, and try other test
binaries, like the examples that come with [the Pico
SDK](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk).

If you're lucky enough to have a board with a reset button, all of the binaries
in this project also support entering `bootsel` mode by pressing the reset
button twice. You then copy the `pico-midi-transformer.uf2` file to the USB
drive as described above.

If you have a [pico probe](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/debug-probe/) or
other debugging unit, and if your microcontroller exposes the ports you need,
you can use `openocd` to deploy binaries. With this method, you deploy the
`pico-midi-transformer.elf` file generated during the build process. Check the
"Getting Started with Pico Guide" for more info.

### Trying it Out

Connect the MIDI input provided by the microcontroller to something that makes a
sound.  Connect something that makes notes to the secondary USB port on the
microcontroller.  Play notes.  Where possible, notes should be "flipped" with
respect to middle C (there are notes that can't be flipped because 60 is not
actually the centre of 0-127).
